README.md, before:

# True Color Tools
Astronomy-focused set of Python tools with GUI that use spectra construction and eye absorption to calculate realistic colors.

Input data is accepted in the form of channel measurements, color indices, magnitudes, physical parameters and even images.
Customizable output in RGB, Hex, image or spectra database table.

![TCT preview](ViewMe.png)


## Installation

**Basic installation way**

Tested on Windows 10/11 and Linux (openSUSE).

1. Clone the repository or download archive by the GitHub web interface (press the button `Code`, then I recommend choosing `Download ZIP`, unpack the archive after downloading);
2. Make sure you have Python (3.6 or higher due to f-strings) and the required libraries: [NumPy](https://numpy.org/), [SciPy](https://www.scipy.org/), [Pillow](https://pillow.readthedocs.io/), [Plotly](https://plotly.com/python/) and [PySimpleGUI](https://pysimplegui.readthedocs.io/) (4.29 or higher). If you use Anaconda, the first 4 libraries are already preinstalled. You can install the libraries all at once using [`requirements.txt`](requirements.txt): `python -m pip install -r requirements.txt`;
3. Run [TCT.py](Scripts/TCT.py)

**Executable file (no Python)**

Only for Windows. Please note that this installation way is [SevenSpheres](https://github.com/SevenSpheres)' initiative and the relevance of updates is not guaranteed.

1. Go to [releases of SevenSpheres' fork](https://github.com/SevenSpheres/TrueColorTools/releases);
1. Select, download and unpack the desired archive from the assets;
1. Run TCT.exe


## How to use

[`TCT.py`](Scripts/TCT.py) includes four tabs for different purposes: *Spectra*, *Images*, *Table* and *Blackbody & Redshifts*. *Spectra* and *Table* tabs are linked to the database, other tabs ask for input. No internet connection is required.

Several global concepts:
- The wavelengths are always increasing. This is important for customizing the database and for numbering images.
- Database of spectra. Its format is just a dictionary in a Python file and is practically json. You can modify it with your own spectra, and, if you want, share data for TCT.
- Tag system. Each object in the database can be assigned an arbitrary set of tags. Same tags form a lists in the *Spectra* and *Table* tabs, which simplify interaction with a huge database.
- System of sources. Each object in the database can be easily linked to one or several sources by its number. You can see the list in `File`→`Sources`. Also, after an object's name there can be abbreviations, the decoding of which is indicated in `File`→`Notes`.

**Spectra tab** provides access to the built-in spectra database and allows to calculate a color with the selected settings just by clicking on an object.

For example, you can get colors formatted for [Celestia](https://github.com/CelestiaProject/Celestia), which uses chromaticity values from 0 to 1 for each color channel, where 1 is the value of the brightest channel. Make sure that the `chromaticity` mode is used and `Decimal places` is greater than zero (by default it is), and then set the `Color (bit) depth` parameter to zero.

**Images tab** allows you to load image(s), specify wavelengths and save a processed image, for each pixel of which a spectrum was built. It takes a very long time with the current algorithm, so you can check out the preview.

**Table tab** generates a customizable table of calculated colors from the spectra database. You can see examples [here](Tables/).

**Blackbody & Redshifts tab** calculates the influence of physical phenomena on color. Based on the blackbody spectrum, the program displays the changes in color and brightness from Doppler and gravitational redshifts. You can lock the exposure through the logarithmic spectral irradiance scale. It is measured in energy from 1 m² on 550 nm in the 1 nm range.


### Auxiliary
- [`user.py`](Scripts/user.py) returns the specified language and path to the tools, or determines them automatically;
- [`config.py`](Scripts/config.py) allows you to specify in it the language and path applicable to all tools;
- [`calculations.py`](Scripts/calculations.py) is the mathematical core. It contains most of functions and some zero points of photometric systems;
- [`cmf.py`](Scripts/cmf.py) contains sensitivity of human perception and used curve of color space;
- [`database.py`](Scripts/database.py) contains spectra, color indices and their sources;
- [`filters.py`](Scripts/filters.py) is a database of spacecraft photometric systems;
- [`strings.py`](Scripts/strings.py) contains almost all used inscriptions of other scripts in supported languages.


## Database format

### Mandatory parameters
- `nm`: list of wavelengths in nanometers
- `br`: same-size list of reflectivity
- `mag`: same-size list of magnitudes
- `filters`: filter system, linked with [`filters.py`](Scripts/filters.py)
- `indices`: dictionary of color indices, use only with `filters`
- `bands`: list of filters' names, use only with `filters`

### Optional parameters
- `albedo`: bool (`True` if reflectivity was set by albedo values) or float (in V band or on 550 nm)
- `sun`: bool (`True` if spectrum contains the solar reflection)
- `tags`: list of strings, categorizes a spectrum

## Localization
Language detection priority order:
1) Manual language indication on the top of a tool's code;
2) Using the language specified in the [`config.py`](Scripts/config.py);
3) Automatic system language detection.

```py
lang = user.lang() # config.py or system language

lang = user.lang("ru") # the same as user.lang("Russian") and user.lang("Русский")
```

TCT supports English, German and Russian. If you want to add support for your language, you can do it in the same way as Russian and German in [`strings.py`](Scripts/strings.py).

Commit message:

Just no more user.py and config.py
- no connection to OS
- runtime translation is now enough

README.md, after:

# True Color Tools
Astronomy-focused set of Python tools with GUI that use spectra construction and eye absorption to calculate realistic colors.

Input data is accepted in the form of channel measurements, color indices, magnitudes, physical parameters and even images.
Customizable output in RGB, Hex, image or spectra database table.

![TCT preview](ViewMe.png)


## Installation

**Basic installation way**

Tested on Windows 10/11 and Linux (openSUSE).

1. Clone the repository or download archive by the GitHub web interface (press the button `Code`, then I recommend choosing `Download ZIP`, unpack the archive after downloading);
2. Make sure you have Python (3.6 or higher due to f-strings) and the required libraries: [NumPy](https://numpy.org/), [SciPy](https://www.scipy.org/), [Pillow](https://pillow.readthedocs.io/), [Plotly](https://plotly.com/python/) and [PySimpleGUI](https://pysimplegui.readthedocs.io/) (4.29 or higher). If you use Anaconda, the first 4 libraries are already preinstalled. You can install the libraries all at once using [`requirements.txt`](requirements.txt): `python -m pip install -r requirements.txt`;
3. Run [TCT.py](Scripts/TCT.py)

**Executable file (no Python)**

Only for Windows. Please note that this installation way is [SevenSpheres](https://github.com/SevenSpheres)' initiative and the relevance of updates is not guaranteed.

1. Go to [releases of SevenSpheres' fork](https://github.com/SevenSpheres/TrueColorTools/releases);
1. Select, download and unpack the desired archive from the assets;
1. Run TCT.exe


## How to use

[`TCT.py`](Scripts/TCT.py) includes four tabs for different purposes: *Spectra*, *Images*, *Table* and *Blackbody & Redshifts*. *Spectra* and *Table* tabs are linked to the database, other tabs ask for input. No internet connection is required.

Several global concepts:
- The wavelengths are always increasing. This is important for customizing the database and for numbering images.
- Database of spectra. Its format is just a dictionary in a Python file and is practically json. You can modify it with your own spectra, and, if you want, share data for TCT.
- Tag system. Each object in the database can be assigned an arbitrary set of tags. They form lists of categories in the *Spectra* and *Table* tabs, which makes it easier to work with a huge database.
- System of sources. Each object in the database can be easily linked to one or several sources by its number. You can see the list in `File`→`Sources`. Note: the *Table* tab renumbers the sources by usage in the processed category. Also, after an object's name there can be abbreviations, the decoding of which is indicated in `File`→`Notes`.
- The language can be changed through the top menu. Runtime translation is not available only for tab titles (due to PySimpleGUI limitations). For full localization, you can change the `lang` variable in the [`TCT.py`](Scripts/TCT.py) code. TCT supports English, German and Russian. If you want to add support for your language, you can do it by analogy in [`strings.py`](Scripts/strings.py).

**Spectra tab** provides access to the built-in spectra database and allows to calculate a color with the selected settings just by clicking on an object.

For example, you can get colors formatted for [Celestia](https://github.com/CelestiaProject/Celestia), which uses chromaticity values from 0 to 1 for each color channel, where 1 is the value of the brightest channel. Make sure that the `chromaticity` mode is used and `Decimal places` is greater than zero (by default it is), and then set the `Color (bit) depth` parameter to zero.

**Images tab** allows you to load image(s), specify wavelengths and save a processed image, for each pixel of which a spectrum was built. It takes a very long time with the current algorithm, so you can check out the preview.

**Table tab** generates a customizable table of calculated colors from the spectra database. You can see examples [here](Tables/).

**Blackbody & Redshifts tab** calculates the influence of physical phenomena on color. Based on the blackbody spectrum, the program displays the changes in color and brightness from Doppler and gravitational redshifts. You can lock the exposure through the logarithmic spectral irradiance scale. It is measured in energy from 1 m² on 550 nm in the 1 nm range.


### Auxiliary
- [`calculations.py`](Scripts/calculations.py) is the mathematical core. It contains most of functions and some zero points of photometric systems;
- [`cmf.py`](Scripts/cmf.py) contains sensitivity of human perception and used curve of color space;
- [`database.py`](Scripts/database.py) contains spectra, color indices and their sources;
- [`filters.py`](Scripts/filters.py) is a database of spacecraft photometric systems;
- [`strings.py`](Scripts/strings.py) contains almost all used inscriptions of other scripts in supported languages.


## Database format

### Mandatory parameters
- `nm`: list of wavelengths in nanometers
- `br`: same-size list of reflectivity
- `mag`: same-size list of magnitudes
- `filters`: filter system, linked with [`filters.py`](Scripts/filters.py)
- `indices`: dictionary of color indices, use only with `filters`
- `bands`: list of filters' names, use only with `filters`

### Optional parameters
- `albedo`: bool (`True` if reflectivity was set by albedo values) or float (in V band or on 550 nm)
- `sun`: bool (`True` if spectrum contains the solar reflection)
- `tags`: list of strings, categorizes a spectrum
